# equatorial-pacific-turbulent-mixing
For the UW Oceanography BS senior thesis, I am studying vertical mixing in the equatorial pacific. <br>
The natural El Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO) sets an important global background state for climate and weather. Evaluating the environmental factors that influence the onset and sustenance of El Nino and La Nina conditions is invaluable for predicting their length and severity. As trade wind velocity varies in response to pressure differences and sea surface temperature (SST), feedback in the Equatorial Pacific Ocean leads to further change in trade wind velocity. One important feedback in SST is turbulent mixing. As wind velocity decreases, Equatorial Undercurrent (EUC) velocity decreases, reducing subsurface shear and thus mixing, which decreases SST and wind velocity further. Turbulent mixing can be parametrized by calculating such metrics as Thorpe Scales L_T, turbulent dissipation rates epsilon, and Richardson numbers R_i. Data to calculate these can be obtained with Acoustic Doppler Current Profilers (ADCP) and Conductivity, Temperature, and Depth (CTD) profiles. These metrics will be calculated with ADCP and CTD data from warming El Nino and warming La Nina cruises. The results will be compared with those driven with model data as described in Deppenmeier et al., 2021. It is predicted that there will be decreased mixing during warming El Nino and increased mixing during warming La Nina. <br>
Data from a cruise on the R/V Thomas G. Thompson out of Pago Pago, American Samoa from 12/28/23 to 1/11/24 from 5 degrees S to 5 degrees N along 167 degrees West will be used to calculate the El Nino mixing metrics mentioned above. La Nina mixing metrics will be calculated in the same way with data from a cruise in late February 2023 across the Equator along 180 degrees. These will be compared with mixing metrics driven from POP2 model data. <br>
It is hypothesized that vertical mixing during a warming El Nino will be decreased compared to a warming La Nina and it is expected that these results will be consistent with those from POP2 model data.<br>
Deppenmeier, A.-L., F. O. Bryan, W. S. Kessler, and L. Thompson (2021), Modulation of cross-isothermal velocities with ENSO in the tropical pacific cold tongue, Journal of Physical Oceanography, 51(5), 1559–1574, doi:10.1175/jpo-d-20-0217.1. 
